Hey, welcome back. In this video, let's
get into the details of pre-processing
in the LoRa or Qura training pipeline.
So, I mentioned in the previous video
that this is the hardest part in the
workflow. Uh most likely if you make a
mistake, this is where you have some
mistake in your pipeline. And so, let's
understand the various elements, the
various steps within the pre
pre-processing stage. Okay. Uh I
mentioned previously though. So what you
are doing in pre-processing here is
you're taking the original samples and
for each sample you first convert it
into the messages format. We'll see what
that means. Uh next we apply the chat
template to it and then tokenization and
assistant only masking. So uh what we
want to do here is instead of taking you
through the code and trying to explain
what's happening the logic uh let's
instead look at the outputs of uh the
all of these individual steps within
pre-processing. So I think it will be
easier to follow what's happening and
why we are doing that. Okay. Uh so we
put together a pre uh a notebook uh
which is in the week 3 repository. You
can check it out. So uh we'll we'll use
a very simple example and we are trying
to mimic what the types of examples we
have in the Samsung summarization data
set where you have conversations between
two or more people and we expect the the
large language model to summarize that
conversation uh in a succinct manner.
Okay. So here's an example between two
people A and B. A says hi, B says hello,
how are you? And then A says I'm great,
thanks. And maybe the summary for uh
that that short conversation could be
something like A greets B and says
they're doing well. Now this is a fairly
short toy example because we really just
want to show you the mechanics of
pre-processing here. The actual examples
in the summarization data set are longer
and more more interesting than than
this. Okay. All right. So in addition to
the sample, we are also going to use
this task instruction. It's going to be
part of the prompt we give to the LLM.
And that task instruction is you're a
helpful assistant who writes concise
factual summaries of conversations.
Summarize the following conversation
into a single sentence. So all right,
that's the example. That's the task. And
then the the sample that we're going to
use uh to demo the pre-processing
outputs. Okay. Uh all right. So as I
said there's various steps in here.
First is to convert it to the messages
form. We'll see the the the output of
that. Uh [snorts] next we applied a chat
template. And then steps three and four
we tokenize it and then apply the
assistant only masking. Okay. All right.
So what we've done here is taken that
sample and then applied those steps here
which is what uh we have here and let's
just see the outputs. I've done some
pretty formatting here so you could
follow along with the outputs. Okay. So
here's what we what we get. Let me
scroll up a little bit. Okay. So we
started with the original example which
is as I as we saw there's a dialogue and
the summary right uh the summary is what
we want the model to respond that's like
the assistance response that we are
training it to produce right okay step
one as I said it's the conver conversion
to the messages format so we took this
uh this sample uh now this sample by the
way could have been in any format it
happens to be a dictionary here but it
could be any format we could have
created did this uh this might have come
in an XML format or JSON other other
format but what it we have to do is to
convert it into these very specific
messages format and it is essentially a
list of dictionaries uh each dictionary
has two keys in it role and content
right so in this case you can see there
are two dictionaries there's the first
one where the user says something and
then there's a second one where the
assistant responded with the response
right so uh Again we saw the task what
we've done is really uh in this step of
converting it to the messages format
we've taken the instruction and then use
that as a prefix in the in the string
and then we have the example with with
the dialogue and then it's like a cue to
the assistant to okay now give me the
response right and then you have the
response from the assistant a greets B
says they're doing well okay we just
taken that original example converted
into a format that the model expects to
get all Right. Step one. Now you might
wonder, okay, why why this format,
right? I mean, where did this even come
from? Uh really it came from the llama
documentation. If you go to hugging face
and go to this llama 3.2 1 billion
instruct model, this is what we're using
in this example. Uh we could have been
using a different model. You would need
to read the docs of uh the specific
model you're using. So if you scroll
down here and you check their usage, you
will see that they specify the messages
format. uh and this is a pretty
consistent format. Most models are going
to have this this structure to it. Uh
but you still want to verify with
whichever model you're using. So here
you have ro content ro content right and
it it can be like multi-ton conversation
more than the two we are seeing here.
Okay. So that is what we did uh in step
one. Converted the original example into
list of messages uh which is list of
dictionaries. Okay. What happens next?
We applied the chat template to it.
Okay. uh the the messages format is a
list of dictionary that you just saw.
But after you convert it into the chat
template, it literally turns into a
single string. Okay. Now, one thing you
might have seen is we actually used the
chat template that came with the
tokenizer. Now, this tokenizer is very
specific. We did we don't write this.
This comes with hugging face. If you
specify the model and you choose its
tokenizer, uh this will have its apply
chat template method available on it.
Now to be clear, this is on instruct
models. We are working with chat models
uh because they are trained to respond
to queries. That's why we are taking
starting with an instruct model and
instruct models have this apply chat
template method available on them. So
we've taken this, we didn't write this
code. This came automatically. All we
needed to do was give it the the sample
messages uh the list, right? the the uh
the messages output that we have created
from the sample. So if you get give it
that you will get the chat uh chat
template. Okay. Uh all right. So we we
get that uh structured and you have uh
here the the the chat template. Now you
will notice a couple of interesting
things here. Let me scroll up a little
bit. This is actually the start of it.
So first of all you might start noticing
or recognizing them. These are special
tokens, right? We this wasn't part of
our messages, right? It it's it's
actually injected by the chat template.
And you see these headers, there's a
beginning of text. You will see end of
text ID as well. And then these this
start header ID, end header ID ID which
uh defines the the role, right? So this
is a system role. We didn't have a
system uh message in there. If you
recall, we only had the user and the
assistant. So this was inserted by the
chat template. You you'll also see this
this interesting thing cutting knowledge
date. Apparently llama 3 these models
were trained with this information
injected into the chat template.
You will see if you try chat templates
of other models other instruct models
not all of them have this structure this
cutting knowledge one. Some of them
actually don't have it. So this just
happens to be how llama model was
trained. Okay with this this thing at
the beginning. uh and and then you will
see the start header user uh here which
defines the start of the users uh
content you have that coming from this
is what we gave it and then you have the
end of text ID which says okay the user
part is done again you have the start of
the assistant now so there's the start
header ID assistant and header header ID
and then what the assistant said and
then you have this right now if we had
more than two tons here well first one
was just the system one that was
injected. We didn't create that. But
after that, we had the user said
something and the assistant said
something. But if you went back and
forth, you would just have this kind of
structure repeating itself within a
single string. Now, okay, you the
important part here is okay, we're just
following this u you know the the the
devil uh devil's advocate here would be
like okay, do we have to do this? Do we
have to what if we break this? What if
we take this part out? Right? We could
ourselves construct this chat template
and you can do that. I would advise not
trying to go against the chat template
because these models, these large
language models have been trained on
billions, hundreds of billions,
sometimes trillions of tokens and this
is how they were trained, right? This is
the specific structure that was the the
data format that was given to them and
they've learned that over and over and
over again. So you can always teach
these models new behaviors, but why do
that right? I mean why why swim against
the tide here? So uh use these chat
templates and then follow the structure
that they're supposed to have. Right?
Okay. So that is the second step chat
applying chat template. After that once
so we started with the example which
could have been in any format. Then we
converted into the messages structure
which we wrote the code to do that.
After that we had the chat template
right and then the chat template
actually uh converts it into this
string. uh and after that by the way the
chat template as I said we don't write
that code it actually came with hugging
face the method came with that uh the
tokenizer but after that we have to do
the tokenization and the masking okay
now tokenization is actually is
available through the tokenizer but the
masking this is the part that we had to
write custom code and why because we are
doing assistant only masking this is the
specific thing we are doing in our in
our case which is fine-tuning uh the the
model to produce this summary, right?
And for that, we want it to learn some
very specific parts of producing text.
All right? So, let's uh let's understand
what we're trying to do. So, again, the
text the whole prompt is from here or
the string uh the chat template goes
from uh you know the that part there all
the way to here, right? But you will see
that some of these things are system
then you have the user and then you have
the assistant for the assistant for the
large language model to give you the
answers that you want. In this case
summaries really that's the only part
you care about right you're not trying
to teach the large language model to
produce this part. This is the the
prompt that is given to it that is uh
that is always given to it and really we
just want it to produce this part which
is what comes after you given this
instruction and you give it the cue to
produce a summary this there should be a
summary followed by a token that kind of
specifies that okay I'm done with this
summary right I'm not going to produce
any more text after this so without this
without the assistant only masking what
we would normally be doing is teaching
it to produce all of this text. So what
what what we mean is given this first
token produce this token given these two
tokens produce this third one right it's
like every step of the way you're saying
what comes next what comes next learn to
produce that whereas here we are saying
given all of this learn to produce this
part one at a time one token at a time
that's all we care about so in the
tokenization that's that's done
automatically but in masking we are
writing custom code and we are clearly
telling the model Okay, I don't care
about you trying to produce this other
text that comes before. I just need you
to focus on learning to produce the
assistance part and that part if you
scroll all the way down begins here.
Right? So that whole chat template which
is a string gets converted into
individual tokens and these are all the
tokens you see here uh 98 of them. Uh
and again you know you can see sometimes
a single word can be broken into
multiple tokens. The word greeds is
actually broken into two words gray GRE
and ETSs. But we don't really care how
that tokenization is happening. It's
it's built into the the model. But what
we want what we are specifying is okay
there's there's masking here. Uh we are
disabling the masking meaning we are
telling the model okay learn to produce
this text given everything above it. And
you will see uh I'll scroll through the
headers. You can see what's in these
last two columns. There's a label and
there's a mask. Okay. So what we are
saying is here uh only learn to produce
this this we are not masking this we are
not hiding this anything else above that
do not try to predict that do not learn
to predict that that is not your task
and so when you see this this label of
-100 what's really happening internally
in the training logic is the model
disregards that token in the loss
calculation okay which means it does not
need to learn to produce that predict
that token and anywhere there is ne not
a negative 100 so there's a token 32 2
these are ids by the way uh token ID 32
token ID 2886 this is what we saying
given everything else produce predict
this given everything up to that point
produce the next one and so on okay I I
think I probably explained this if in
enough detail right the the last things
when you're giving the process
pre-processed data to the model it's
going to need the input ids which are
which are these these are the the same
things uh it's going to need the uh the
labels which is this part here and
remember the labels are uh what we are
basically saying should be coming
afterwards and then finally we have uh
yeah we have the attention mask so let
me clarify what the attention mask is
doing okay so the attention mask is
specifying to the model to pay attention
to it in a way now it's all one all the
way through but you have to know that
what's really happening in the training
process is you're giving it a batch of
data and these examples could be of
different lengths
And so what we do is to try to make them
the same length we pad right we add
padding and the padding during uh during
uh training is going to be on the right
hand side which means at the end and
during uh generation would be on the
left hand side. So you can think about
the logic why we would want to do that.
But uh when you do the to the padding
when you have multiple examples you want
all of them to be the same length. Then
we are telling the model uh the
attention mask for those padded tokens
will be zeros. Uh it's basically just
saying hey don't pay attention there.
These are just additional tokens we are
adding just so they are all equal equal
length uh in the processing. Okay. All
right. So that is a key part here which
is uh convert to messages do the uh chat
template tokenize apply the attention
mask okay or create the attention mask
uh well and and the assistant only mask
right so that's what we're giving to the
uh the model and then it learns to
predict the assistant only part all
right I hope this was helpful I know
this was a long video uh but I felt it
was important for you to understand all
of these individual steps that are
happening during pre-processing okay uh
we'll see you in the next video thank